problems with social media

Are there problems with social media? What is social media? And what kind of problems could it have?

First, let's define social media. A space where people can be social. "space" means an internet website that behaves in a certain way and has certain properties, concerns, and objectives. "people" are you and me (although sometimes more than that which we'll get into later.), "can be social" is the set of affordances designed into the website.

examples, friendster, myspace, twitter, facebook. (also, iMessage, slack, etc.)

TODO: assumptions

1) Dunbar's Number
The number of people with whom one can maintain stable social relationships. Is this number scientific? Kind of. there have been a few studies and they seem to suggest that it's a good guess. Is it the best guess we have? Problably.

So what's the problem? When the number of people > 150, your brain has a problem seeing them as "people". this is how atroicitys happen. "but I have 100 FB friends!" you say. Perhaps, but the nature of the media means that the number of people you're going to interact with on FB is way more than 150. even if you had 20 friends and each of those had 20 friends, the theorectical number of people you might interact with on facebook (via the comment system) is 400. more than double dunbar's number. SOME OF THOSE WON'T BE PEOPLE TO YOUR BRAIN, SORRY, THATS JUST HOW IT WORKS.


2)
Context Collapse (danah boyd). 

When you interact IRL you always interact in some kind of context. At home with spouse, at home with complete family, at home with extended family, at work, at church, at school, at shopping, at restaurant. all of these places are a context within which you have certain behaviors, expectations, etc. on the social medias, there is only 1 context* (TODO: caveats to that claim) within which you interact with everyone. the context provides an invisible framework that defines what your role and attitudes and objectives are. (home context: loving vulnerable supportive. work context: apolitical, don't do anything that could get you fired or a bad performance review, school: shut up you're not proving anything)

The lack of context removes all frameworks and makes interaction much more difficult/problematic/higher congnitive load. also other problems?


3) content collapse (nicholas carr).

"Content began collapsing the moment it began to be delivered through computers. Digitization made it possible to deliver information that had required specialized mediums — newspapers and magazines, vinyl records and cassettes, radios, TVs, telephones, cinemas, etc. — through a single, universal medium. In the process, the formal standards and organizational hierarchies inherent to the old mediums began to disappear. The computer flattened everything."

what this mean?

4) sharing, also: what is a news?

"Falsehood flies, and the Truth comes limping after it" – swift

what is a news?

when i was 10 years old, news was produced and consumed in a limited number of ways. Newspaper was printed (PRINTING=$$$), delivered by hand (SOMEWHAT LESS $), created by newsmen (YIKES $$$), and consumed in a certain way. who knows what "below the fold" actually means? News production (such as it was) was a loss leader to sell classified advertising.

teevee news: Produced by org ($$$), sold a product (your eyeballs) to a customer (advertisers).

Magazine and teevee magazine (60 minutes): TODO

"sharing" back then meant either clipping article or making a xerox (for what, 25¢?) placing into envelope, attaching first class mail postage, putting into mailbox, and then waiting the week or two round trip for a response. ARE YOU FUCKING KIDDING ME?!?!

video sharing: not nearly as easy. put blank tape in vcr. wait for the right moment. hit record. hit stop at some point. put tape in mailer. pay extra postage. HOPE TO GOD RECIPIENT HAS VCR.

Music was pretty easy: tape to tape and mail or tape from radio?.

such a significant barrier to entry for sharing means you are only going to share things of a deeply personal or highly historical nature.

sharing trivially = no effort.

Also, let's not forget to mention what Chomsky et al have to say about how traditional "news" works, cf: "The propaganda model"

now let's consider: sharing on social media. there is no barrier to entry ALSO there is no responsibility for assessing veracity of what is being shared.

Even today, production of "news" has at least some minimum of standards. sharing has none. an unvetted, emotinoally manipulative blog post can spread more quickly and easily than a long form investigative journalism that took a year and $$$ to produce.

5) affordances: (Sasha Costanza-Chock) and how design of a system affects the usage of that system, also: mcluhan "the medium is the message"

6) ATTENTION as the currency in the marketplace of ideas (peter coffin)

TODO: likes, comments, notifications, dopamine feedback loop, etc.

7) etc: memes, filter bubble, homophily, wat?


https://mediaengagement.org/research/social-media-how-platforms-can-do-better/

https://mediaengagement.org/research/making-strangers-less-strange/

https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3189696

https://muse.jhu.edu/article/522116/pdf

https://time.com/5505431/internet-feel-awful-dignity/
